# Augmentations

Author: rnystrom@google.com, jakemac@google.com, lrn@google.com <br>
Version: 1.33 (see [Changelog](#Changelog) at end)

Augmentations allow spreading your implementation across multiple locations,
both within a single file and across multiple files. They can add new top-level
declarations, inject new members into classes, and wrap functions and variables
in additional code.

## Motivation

Dart libraries are the unit of code reuse. When an API is too large to fit into
a single file, you can usually split it into multiple libraries and then have
one main library export the others. That works well when the functionality in
each file is made of separate top-level declarations.

However, sometimes a single *class* declaration is too large to fit comfortably
in a file. Dart libraries and even part files are no help there. Because of
this, users have asked for something like partial classes in C# ([#252][] 71 👍,
[#678][] 18 👍). C# also supports splitting [the declaration and implementation
of methods into separate files][partial].

[#252]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/issues/252
[#678]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/issues/678
[partial]: https://github.com/jaredpar/csharplang/blob/partial/proposals/extending-partial-methods.md

### Generated code

Size isn't the only reason to split a library into multiple files. Code
generation is common in Dart. [AngularDart][] compiles HTML templates to Dart
files. The [freezed][] and [built_value][] packages generate Dart code to
implement immutable data structures.

[angulardart]: https://github.com/angulardart
[freezed]: https://pub.dev/packages/freezed
[built_value]: https://pub.dev/packages/built_value

In cases like this, it's important to have the hand-authored and
machine-generated code in separate files so that the code generator doesn't
inadvertently erase a user's code. AngularDart generates a separate library for
the component. The freezed and built_value packages generate part files.

### Macros

The language team is investigating adding [macros][] to Dart. In theory, this
would *reduce* the need for text-based code generation language features.
Instead of code generation, users could write macros instead. They'd let the
compiler expand them, and not worry about anything ending up on disk.

[macros]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/blob/master/working/macros/feature-specification.md

If users never needed to fix bugs in macros, look at stack traces, step into
code in a debugger, or navigate to the location of a compile error, that would
be true. But understanding and digging into code is fundamental to programming.
An error could be thrown from code generated by a macro. A macro might generate
code that produces a compile error (either deliberately because the macro was
misused or because the macro itself has a bug). A user might be profiling their
application and a macro might generate particularly slow code.

In all of those cases, users need some way to read and understand code produced
by macros. So, even if that code is generated automatically by the compiler as
part of macro expansion, it's still useful to have it be in a canonical
well-specified form that users can understand.

This proposal defines that format. The idea is that a Dart compiler executes
macros and then produces one or more new part files that contain all
of the changes that the macros made to the library where they are applied, as
new declarations to be added or augmentations that modify existing
declarations. The compiler then adds those part files to the existing libraries.

But improved part files and augmenting declarations are not *only* a
serialization format for macros. They are first-class language features that
can be produced by non-macro code generators or written by hand by users who
simply want to break a giant library or class into smaller files.

## Part files with imports

As part of the meta-programming and augmentation features, we expand the
capabilities of part files. See ["Parts with Imports"][parts_with_imports.md].

With that feature, a part file can now have its own `import` and `export`
directives, and further nested `part` files, with part files inheriting the
imports and prefixes of their parent (part or library) file.

Augmentation declarations interact with part files mainly in restrictions on
where an augmenting declaration may occur relative to the declaration it
augments, as described below.

For this, we define the following relations on *declarations* based on the
relations between *files* of a library.

We say that a syntactic declaration *occurs in* a Dart file if the
declaration's source code occurs in that Dart file.

We then say that a Dart file *contains* a declaration if the declaration occurs
in the file itself, or if any of the files included by the Dart file contain
the declaration. _That is, if the declaration occurs in a file in the subtree
of that Dart file._

We then define two *orderings* of declarations in a library, one partial and one
complete, as follows:

We define a partial ordering on syntactic declarations of a library,
*is above*, such that a syntactic declaration *A* is *above* a syntactic
declaration *B* if and only if:

*   *A* and *B* occur in the same file, and the start of *A* is syntactically
    before the start of *B*, in source order, or
*   The file where *A* occurs includes the file where *B* occurs.

We define a *total ordering relation* (transitive, anti-symmetric, irreflexive)
on declarations of a library, *is before* (and its reverse, *is after*) such
that for any two syntactic declarations *A*, and *B*:

*   If *A* and *B* occur in the same file, then:
    *   If the start of *A* is syntactically before the start of *B* in source
        order, then *A* is before *B*.
    *   Otherwise *B* is before *A*.
*   Otherwise *A* and *B* occur in different files:
    *   Let *F* be the least containing file for those two files.
    *   If *A* occurs in *F* then *A* is before *B*.
    *   If *B* occurs in *F* then *B* is before *A*.
    *   Otherwise *A* and *B* are contained in distinct included files of *F*.
    *   If the `part` directive in *F* including the file that contains *A* is
        syntactically before the `part` directive in *F* including the file that
        contains *B* in source order, then *A* is before *B*.
    *   Otherwise *B* is before *A*.

Then *B* *is after* *A* if and only if *A* *is before* *B*.

*In short, if *A* is above *B*, then *A* is before *B*. Otherwise, they are
in sibling part subtrees and the directive in the subtree whose `part`
directive occurs first is before the other.*

This order is total. It effectively orders declarations by a pre-order
depth-first traversal of the file tree, visiting declarations of a file
in source order, and then recursing on `part`-directives in source order.

[parts_with_imports.md]: parts_with_imports.md "Parts with Imports Feature Specification"

## Augmentation declarations

This feature introduces the modifier `augment` as the first token of many
kinds of declarations. These declarations are known as _augmentation
declarations_.

*In Dart without this feature there are no augmentation declarations. Now
that we are adding augmentation declarations we need to have a term that
denotes a declaration which is not an augmentation. That is, it is one of
the "normal" declarations that we've had all the time.*

We say that a declaration which is not an augmentation declaration is an
_introductory_ declaration.

*In Dart without this feature, a declaration generally introduces an entity
(a class, a method, a variable, etc). With the augmentation feature, such
entities are introduced by a sequence of declarations rather than a single
declaration. A single declaration can still do it, that's just a special
case, but we need to talk about these sequences of declarations as being a
single thing. The notion of a context helps us doing this by indicating the
location where we need to look in order to find all those declarations.
Note that this location does not have to be contiguous, it can consist of a
set of ranges (e.g., the context of a member declaration can be a set of
class declarations).*

The _context_ of a top-level declaration in a Dart file is the library of the
associated tree of Dart files. The context of a member declaration in a type
declaration named `N` is the set of type declarations (introductory or
augmenting) named `N` in the enclosing set of Dart files.

*Some declarations do not match any of these cases (e.g., a local variable
declaration in a method body), but this does not matter: We never need to
talk about the context of a local variable.*

An augmentation declaration _D_ is a declaration marked with the new
built-in identifier `augment`, which makes _D_ augment a declaration _D1_
with the same name and in the same context as _D_. _D1_ is determined as
being before _D_ and after every other declaration with the same name and
in the same context which is before _D_ *(that is, _D1_ is the greatest
declaration which is smaller than _D_, according to the 'after'
ordering)*. A compile-time error occurs if no declaration satisfies the
requirements on _D1_.

We say that _D1_ is the declaration which is _augmented_ by _D_.

*Note that _D1_ can be an augmentation declaration or an introductory
declaration.*

An augmentation declaration does not introduce a new name into the surrounding
scope. *We could say that it attaches itself to the existing name.*

Making `augment` a built-in identifier is language versioned, to make it
non-breaking for pre-feature code.

Augmentation declarations include:

*   Type augmentations, which can add new members to types, including adding new
    values to enums, or even alter the type hierarchy by adding mixin
    applications to a class.

*   Function augmentations, which can replace the body of a function, or provide
    a body if none was present.

*   Variable augmentations, which can wrap the initializer of a variable in the
    augmented library, or provide an initializer if none was present.

A non-local variable induces a getter and possibly a setter. It is possible
to augment getters and setters (this is a kind of function augmentation),
including the ones that are induced by variables.

*This means that augmentation of a variable declaration can be a getter
declaration that augments the induced getter, a setter declaration that
augments the induced setter, or a variable declaration that augments the
initializer. The augmenting declarations can themselves be an implicitly
induced getter or setter, or an explicitly declared one.*

*Note that an abstract variable declaration and an external variable
declaration correspond to a getter declaration and possibly a setter
declaration. There is no notion of an initializing expression, and hence
also no support for augmenting it.*

These operations cannot be expressed today using only imports, exports, or
part files. Any Dart file (library file or part file) can contain
augmentation declarations. *In particular, an augmentation can augment a
declaration in the same file in which it occurs.*

A type augmentation can add new members to an existing type, or augment a
member declaration in the same context *(that is, in the same type
augmentation, or in a type declaration that it augments)*.

Because of augmentations, non-abstract class, mixin, mixin class, enum,
extension type, and extension declarations are now allowed to contain
abstract member declarations, as long as those members are equipped with a
body by an augmentation declaration. _This is primarily useful for macros,
which may be used to provide a body for an abstract member._

An augmentation that replaces the body of a function may also want to
preserve and run the code of the augmented declaration (hence the name
"augmentation").  It may want to run its own code before the augmented
code, after it, or both.  To support that, we allow a new expression syntax
inside the "bodies" of augmenting declarations (function bodies,
constructor bodies, and variable initializers). Inside an expression in an
augmenting member declaration, the identifier `augmented` can be used to
refer to the augmented function, getter, or setter body, or variable
initializer. This is a contextual reserved word within `augment`
declarations, and has no special meaning outside of that context. See the
next section for a full specification of what `augmented` means, and how it
must be used, in the various contexts.

*Note that within an augmenting member declaration, a reference to a member
by the same name refers to the final version of the member (and not the one
being augmented). The only way to reference the augmented member is by
using the keyword `augmented`.*

The same declaration can be augmented multiple times by separate augmentation
declarations. This occurs in the situation where an augmentation
declaration has an augmented declaration which is itself an augmentation
declaration, and so on, until an introductory declaration is reached. This
will happen in a finite number of steps because of the nature of the
before/after ordering.

Declarations that contribute to the same effective declaration, one
introductory declaration and zero or more augmentation declarations with
the same name and in the same context, are *totally ordered* by the *after*
relation, with the introductory declaration being least, and the
augmentation declarations greater than that.

*In particular, if all the augmentation declarations occur on the same path
in the tree of Dart files that constitute the current library then they are
ordered by their depth in the tree.*

This applies both to top-level declarations and to member declarations of,
for example, class declarations.

#### Path requirement lint suggestion

One issue with the augmentation application order is that it is not stable
under reordering of `part` directives. Sorting part directives can change the
order that augmentation applications in separate included sub-trees are applied
in.

To help avoiding issues, we want to introduce a *lint* which warns if a library
is susceptible to part file reordering changing augmentation application order.
A possible name could be `augmentation_ordering`.

Its effect would be to **report a warning** *if* for any two (top-level)
augmenting declarations with name *n*, one is not *above* the other.

The lint would only apply to user-written augmenting declarations, it should
not include macro generated augmentations. Those are placed where the macro
processor chooses to place them, usually after all other augmentations.

If the lint is satisfied, then all augmenting declarations are ordered by
the *before* relation, which means that no two of them can be in different
sibling parts of the same file, and therefore all the augmenting
declarations occur along a single path down the part-file tree. _This
ensures that *part file directive ordering* has no effect on augmentation
application order._

The language specification doesn’t specify lints or warnings, so this lint
suggestion is not normative. We wish to have the lint, and preferably
include it in the "recommended" lint set, because it can help users avoid
accidental problems. We want it as a lint instead of a language restriction
so that it doesn’t interfere with macro-generated code, and so that users
can `// ignore:` it if they know what they’re doing.

### Type inheritance

An augmenting declaration may have no type annotations for a return type,
variable type, parameter type, or type parameter bound. In the last case,
that includes omitting the `extends` keyword. For a variable or parameter,
a `var` keyword may replace the type.

When applying an augmenting declaration that contains a type annotation at
one of these positions, to a definition to be augmented, it's a compile-time
error if the type denoted by the augmenting declaration is not the same
type as the type that the augmented definition has at the corresponding
position. __An augmenting declaration can omit type annotations, but if it
doesn't, it must repeat the type from the augmented definition__.

### Augmented Expression

The exact result of an `augmented` expression depends on what is being
augmented, but it generally follows the same rules as any normal identifier:

*   **Augmenting getters**: Within an augmenting getter `augmented` invokes
    the augmented getter and evaluates to its return value. If augmenting a
    variable with a getter, this will invoke the implicitly induced getter
    from the augmented variable declaration.

*   **Augmenting setters**: Within an augmenting setter `augmented` must be
    followed by an `=` and will directly invoke the augmented setter. If
    augmenting a variable with a setter, this will invoke the implicitly
    induced setter from the augmented variable declaration.

*   **Augmenting fields**: Within an augmenting variable declaration,
    `augmented` can only be used in an initializer expression, and refers
    to the augmented variable's initializing expression, which is
    immediately evaluated.

    It is a compile-time error to use `augmented` in an augmenting
    variable's initializer if the member being augmented is not a variable
    declaration with an initializing expression.

*   **Augmenting functions**: When augmenting a function, `augmented`
    refers to the augmented function. Tear offs are not allowed, so this
    function must immediately be invoked.

*   **Augmenting operators**: When augmenting an operator, `augmented`
    refers to the augmented operator method, which must be immediately
    invoked using function call syntax. For example, when augmenting
    `operator +` you could use `augmented(1)` to call the augmented
    operator, and when augmenting `operator []=` you would use the
    `augmented(key, value)` syntax.

    *   Note that `augmented` in such an augmenting operator method body is
        not an expression by itself, and cannot be used to tear off the
        augmented operator method. Similar to `super`, it is a syntactic
        form which can only be used in limited ways.

*   **Augmenting enum values**: When augmenting an enum value, `augmented`
    has no meaning and is not allowed.

In all relevant cases, if the augmented member is an instance member, it is
invoked with the same value for `this`.

Assume that the identifier `augmented` occurs in a source location where no
enclosing declaration is augmenting. In this case, the identifier is taken
to be a reference to a declaration which is in scope.

*In other words, `augmented` is just a normal identifier when it occurs
anywhere other than inside an augmenting declaration.*

*Note that, for example, `augmented()` is an invocation of the augmented
function or method when it occurs in an augmenting function or method
declaration. (In the latter case, the augmenting method declaration must
occur inside an augmenting type-introducing declaration, e.g., an
augmenting class or mixin declaration). This is also true if `augmented()`
occurs inside a local function declaration inside the body of that function
or method declaration. We could say that `augmented` is a contextual
reserved word because it is unable to refer to a declaration in scope when
it occurs inside an augmenting declaration, it always has the special
meaning which is associated with augmentations.*

A compile-time error occurs if a declaration with the basename `augmented`
occurs in a location where any enclosing declaration is augmenting. *This
error is applicable to all such declarations, e.g., local functions, local
variables, parameters, and type parameters.*

Consider a non-augmenting member declaration _Dm_ that occurs inside an
augmenting type declaration _Dt_. A compile-time error occurs if the
identifier `augmented` occurs in _Dm_.

*For example, inside `augment class C` we could have a declaration like
`void f() {...augmented()...}`. This is an error because the outer
`augment` forces the meaning of `augmented` to be about augmentation in the
entire scope, but the method declaration is introductory and hence there is
no earlier declaration to augment.*

### Augmenting class-like declarations

A class, enum, extension, extension type, mixin, or mixin class declaration
can be marked with an `augment` modifier:

```dart
augment class SomeClass {
  // ...
}
```

This means that instead of creating a new declaration, the augmentation
modifies a corresponding declaration in the library (which is 'before' this
one).

A class, enum, extension type, mixin, or mixin class augmentation may
specify `extends`, `implements` and `with` clauses (when generally
supported). The types in these clauses are appended to the introductory
declarations’ clauses of the same kind, and if that clause did not exist
previously, then it is added with the new types. All regular rules apply
after this appending process, so you cannot have multiple `extends` on a
class, or an `on` clause on an enum, etc.

Instance or static members defined in the body of the augmenting type,
including enum values, are added to the instance or static namespace of the
corresponding type in the augmented library. In other words, the augmentation
can add new members to an existing type.

Instance and static members inside a class-like declaration may themselves
be augmentations. In that case, they augment the corresponding members in
the same context (one introductory declaration and zero or more augmenting
declarations, all occurring before the current augmenting type
declaration), according to the rules in the following subsections.

It's a **compile-time** error if a library contains two top-level declarations
with the same name, and:

*   Neither is an augmenting declaration, or
*   one of the declarations is a class-like declarations and the other is
    not of the same kind, meaning that at either one is a class, mixin,
    enum, extension or extension type declaration, and the other is not the
    same kind of declaration.

It is a **compile-time error** if:

*   The augmenting declaration and augmented declaration do not have all the
    same modifiers: `abstract`, `base`, `final`, `interface`, `sealed` and
    `mixin` for `class` declarations, and `base` for `mixin` declarations.

    *This is not a technical requirement, but it ensures that looking at either
    declaration shows the complete capabilities of the declaration. It also
    deliberately prevents an augmentation from introducing a restriction that
    isn't visible to a reader of the main declaration.*

*   The augmenting declaration declares an `extends` clause for a `class`
    declaration, but one was already present _(or the `class` was a `mixin
    class` declaration, which does not allow `extends` clauses)_.

*   An augmenting extension declares an `on` clause *(this is a syntax
    error)*. We also do not allow adding further restrictions to a `mixin`
    declaration, so no further types can be added to its `on` clause, if it
    even has one. These restrictions could both be lifted later if we have a
    compelling use case, as there is no fundamental reason it cannot be
    allowed.

*   The type parameters of the augmenting declaration do not match the
    augmented declarations's type parameters. This means there must be
    the same number of type parameters with the exact same type parameter
    names (same identifiers) and bounds if any (same *types*, even if they
    may not be written exactly the same in case one of the declarations
    needs to refer to a type using an import prefix).

    *Since repeating the type parameters is, by definition, redundant, this
    restriction doesn't accomplish anything semantically. It ensures that
    anyone reading the augmenting type can see the declarations of any type
    parameters that it uses in its body and avoids potential confusion with
    other top-level variables that might be in scope in the library
    augmentation.*

### Augmenting functions

A top-level function, static method, instance method, or operator may be
augmented to replace or wrap the augmented body in additional code:

```dart
// Wrap the augmented function in profiling:
augment int slowCalculation(int a, int b) {
  var watch = Stopwatch()..start();
  var result = augmented(a, b);
  print(watch.elapsedMilliseconds);
  return result;
}
```

The augmentation replaces the augmented function’s body with the augmenting
function’s body.

Inside the augmenting function’s body, a special `augmented(…)` expression
may be used to execute the augmented function body. That expression takes
an argument list matching the augmented function's parameter list, and it
has the same return type as the enclosing function.

The augmenting function does not have to pass the same arguments to
`augmented(…)` as were passed to it. It may invoke `augmented` once, more
than once, or not at all.

An augmenting function declaration may have an empty body (`;`) in order to
only augment the metadata or doc comments of the function. In this case the
body of the augmented member is not altered.

It is a compile-time error if:

*   The function signature of the augmenting function does not exactly match the
    function signature of the augmented function. This means that any provided
    return types must be the same type; there must be same number or required
    and optional positional parameters, all with the same types (when provided),
    the same number of named parameters, each pairwise with the same name, same
    type (when provided) and same `required` and `covariant` modifiers, and any
    type parameters and their bounds (when provided) must be the same (like for
    type declarations).

    *Since repeating the signature is, by definition, redundant, this doesn't
    accomplish anything semantically. But it ensures that anyone reading the
    augmenting function can see the declarations of any parameters that it
    uses in its body.*

*   The augmenting function specifies any default values. *Default values are
    defined solely by the introductory function.*

*   An augmenting declaration uses `augmented` when the augmented declaration
    has no concrete implementation. Note that all external declarations are
    assumed to have an implementation provided by another external source, and
    they will throw a runtime exception when called if not.

### Augmenting variables, getters, and setters

While the language treats variables, getters, and setters as
[mostly interchangeable][uniform], within augmentations we do not allow
augmenting getters and setters with variables. Since augmentations are tightly
coupled to the libraries they augment, this restriction has minimal impact, and
it does not greatly affect the ability of a library to change a field to a
getter/setter pair or vice-versa.

[uniform]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_access_principle

You can think of variable, getter, and setter declarations all as ways to define
a higher-level "property" construct. A property has a name and a type. It may
have one or more other capabilities:

*   **A backing storage location.** You get this when you declare a variable
    which is not `abstract` and not `external`.
    Having a storage location enables (and often requires) having the
    variable initialized by generative constructors. A variable may also
    have an **initializing expression** that gets run either lazily for
    top-level and static variables, or at object construction/initialization
    time for instance variables.

*   **A getter function.** This function’s body is provided explicitly when
    you declare a getter. A variable declaration provides an implicit
    getter body that returns the value in the backing storage
    location. (Late variables do some additional checking in that implicit
    body.)

*   **A setter function.** A setter declaration provides a body explicitly. A
    non-final variable declaration provides an implicit setter body that stores
    the given value in the storage location. (Again, late variables do some
    additional updates and/or checks.)

Variable declarations may be marked `abstract` or `external` and, if so,
those are mapped over to the corresponding getter and setter functions.

An `abstract` variable declaration is equivalent to an abstract getter
declaration, and if not `final`, also an abstract setter declaration. An
`external` variable defines an `external` getter and, if not `final`, an
`external` setter.  Unlike abstract declarations, they are considered to
have a concrete implementation.

Variables which require an initializer expression (such as those which have a
non-nullable type and are not marked `late`) need not initially be defined
with one, as long as there exists some augmentation which supplies it.

Augmentations on variables, getters, and setters works mostly at the level of
these separate capabilities. For example, augmenting a variable with a getter
replaces the augmented variable's implicit getter body with the augmenting
getter's.

More specifically:

*   **Augmenting with a getter:** An augmenting getter can augment a getter
    declaration, or the implicit getter of a variable declaration, with all
    prior augmentations applied, by replacing the body of the augmented getter
    with the body of the augmenting getter. Inside the augmenting getter’s
    body, an `augmented` expression executes the augmented getter’s body.

    An augmenting getter declaration may have an empty body (`;`) in order to
    only augment the metadata or doc comments of the getter. In this case the
    body of the augmented getter is not altered.

    Synthetic getters cannot be augmented with metadata or doc comments.

*   **Augmenting with a setter:** An augmenting setter can augment a setter
    declaration, or the implicit setter of a variable declaration, with all
    prior augmentations applied, by replacing the augmented setter’s body with
    the augmenting setter’s body. Inside the augmenting setter’s body, an
    `augmented = <expression>` assignment invokes the augmented setter with the
    value of the expression.

    An augmenting setter declaration may have an empty body (`;`) in order to
    only augment the metadata or doc comments of the setter. In this case the
    body of the augmented setter is not altered.

    Synthetic setters cannot be augmented with metadata or doc comments.

*   **Augmenting a getter and/or setter with a variable:** This is a
    compile-time error in all cases. *Augmenting an abstract or external
    variable with a variable is also a compile-time error, as those are
    actually just syntax sugar for a getter and possibly a setter. An
    augmenting variable replaces its augmented variable’s initializer
    expression, and that can only be done on a declaration that can have an
    initializer expression.*

    We may decide in the future to allow augmenting abstract getters, setters,
    or variables with variables, but for now you can instead use the following
    workaround:

    - Add a new field.
    - Augment the getter and/or setter to delegate to that field.

    If a non-abstract, non-external variable is augmented by an augmenting
    getter or setter, you **can** still augment the variable, as you are only
    augmenting the initializer, metadata, or doc comments of the augmented
    variable. This is not considered to be augmenting the augmenting getter or
    setter, since those are not actually altered.

    The reason for this compile time error is that whether a member declaration
    is a field versus a getter/setter is a visible property of the declaration
    inside the same class or even library:

    *   It determines whether the member can be initialized in a constructor
        initializer list.
    *   It is also a visible distinction when introspecting on a program with
        the analyzer, macros, or mirrors.

    When a declaration is augmented, we don't want the augmentation to be able
    to change any of the known properties of the existing member being
    augmented. For example, we don't allow you to augment a method with a getter
    that returns a function. Augmenting a getter/setter pair with a field would
    change the "can be used in a constructor initializer" property, so we forbid
    it. Augmenting a field with a getter/setter doesn't change that property so
    it is allowed.

*   **Augmenting a variable with a variable:** Augmenting a variable with a
    variable only alters its initializer, metadata, or doc comments. *As
    usual, external and abstract variables cannot augment their
    initializing expression, since it does not exist.*

    Augmenting initializer expressions replace the augmented initializer (or
    provide one where none existed previously). The augmenting initializer
    may use an `augmented` expression which executes the augmented initializer
    expression (if present) when evaluated. If no initializer is provided then
    the augmented initializer is not altered.

    The `late` property of a variable must always be consistent between the
    augmented variable and its augmenting variables.

    If the introductory variable declaration does not have a type
    annotation, then the variable's declared type is found using only that
    declaration, without looking at any further augmenting declarations.
    The type can either be inferred from an initializer expression of the
    introductory variable declaration, be inherited from a superinterface
    for an instance variable, or default to a type of `dynamic` if neither
    applies.  *This ensures that augmenting a variable doesn't change its
    type. That is necessary to ensure that macros cannot change the
    signature of a declaration, a signature which may have been depended on
    by other code, or other macros.*

It is a **compile-time error** if:

*   The introductory and augmenting declarations do not have the same
    declared types (return type for getters, parameter type for setters,
    declared type for variables). This only applies where types are not
    omitted in the augmenting declaration.

*   An augmenting declaration uses `augmented` when the augmented declaration
    has no concrete implementation. Note that all external declarations are
    assumed to have an implementation provided by another external source, and
    otherwise they will throw a runtime error when called.

*   An augmenting variable’s initializing expression uses `augmented`, and
    the stack of augmented declarations do not include a variable with an
    explicit initializing expression. For nullable fields, the implicit null
    initialization only happens if there is no explicit initializer after the
    entire stack of augmentations has been applied.

*   A non-writable variable declaration is augmented with a setter. (Instead,
    the author can declare a *non-augmenting* setter that goes alongside the
    implicit getter defined by the final variable.) _A non-writable variable
    declaration is any that does not introduce a setter, including non-`late`
    `final` variables, `late final` variables with an initializer, and `const`
    variables._

*   A non-final variable is augmented with a final variable. We don't want to
    leave the augmented setter in a weird state.
    *   A final variable can be augmented with a non-`final` augmenting
        variable, and that will not add any setter. An augmenting variable
        declaration only affects the initializer expression, not setters.

*   A variable is augmented with another variable, and one is `late` and
    the other is not. *(Augmentation cannot change `late`-ness, and since being
    `late` does affect the initializer expression, the augmenting variable is
    required to repeat the `late`.)*

*   A getter or setter declaration is augmented by an augmenting variable.

*   A late final variable with no initializer expression is augmented by an
    augmenting variable with an initializer expression.
    _A late final variable with no initializer has a setter, while one with an
    initializer does not. An augmentation must not change whether there is a
    setter._

*   A `const` variable is augmented by an augmenting getter. **(TODO: Can a
    const variable be augmented by another const variable, changing its value,
    or is that too weird?)**

*   An `abstract` variable is augmented with a non-abstract variable.

*   An `external` variable is augmented with an `abstract` variable.

### Augmenting enum members

Some enum members can not be augmented: It is a compile-time error if an
augmenting declaration in an enum declaration (introductory or augmenting)
has the name `values`, `index`, `hashCode`, or `==`.

*It has always been an error for an enum declaration to declare a member
named `index`, `hashCode`, `==`, or `values`, and this rule just clarifies
that this error is applicable for augmenting declarations as well.*

Enum values can _only_ be augmented by enum values, and the implicit getter
introduced by them is not augmentable. The only thing you are allowed to do
when augmenting an enum value is add metadata annotations or doc comments.

When augmenting an enum value, no constructor invocation should be provided.
The original value is always used, and the explicit constructor invocation (if
present) should not be copied.

New enum values may be defined in an augmenting enum, and they will be appended
to the current values of the declaration in augmentation application order.

Augmenting an existing enum value never changes the order in which it appears in
`values`.

For example:

```
// main.dart
part 'a.dart';
part 'c.dart';

enum A {
  first,
  second.custom(1);

  final int b;

  const A() : b = 0;

  const A.custom(this.b);
}
}

// a.dart
part of 'main.dart';
part 'b.dart';

augment enum A {
  third;

  /// Some doc comment
  augment first; // This is still `first` in values.

  @someAnnotation
  augment second; // Don't repeat the argument list, original is used.
}

// b.dart
part of 'a.dart';

augment enum A {
  fourth;
}

// c.dart
part of 'main.dart';

augment enum A {
  fifth;

  // Error, enum value augmentations cannot have an explicit constructor
  // invocation.
  augment third.custom(3);
}
```

Then `A.values` is `[A.first, A.second, A.third, A.fourth, A.fifth]`.

It is a compile-time error if:

*   An augmenting getter is defined for an enum value. _An enum value
    counts as a constant variable._
*   An enum value augmentation provides an explicit constructor invocation.

### Augmenting constructors

Constructors are (as always) more complex. We have many kinds of constructors,
and what it means to augment each is different. For the purposes of this section
we will call out three specific kinds of constructors:

**Non-redirecting generative constructors**: These always produce a new
instance, and have an optional initializer list and optional body.
**Non-redirecting factory constructors**: These are much like static methods,
and might return a subtype of the current type. They also may not create a new
instance, but return an existing one. They must have a body.
**Redirecting constructors**: Both generative and factory constructors can be
redirecting, although the syntax looks slightly different for each.

It may not always be apparent whether a constructor is redirecting or not based
on a given declaration (if there is no body, initializer list, or redirecting
constructor invocation). These constructors are considered to be "potentially
redirecting" or "potentially non-redirecting". An augmentation may alter this
property by augmenting a constructor in a way that makes it concretely
redirecting or not.

It is a compile-time error if:

*   The signature of the constructor augmentation does not match the original
    constructor. It must have the same number of positional parameters, the same
    named parameters, and matching parameters must have the same type,
    optionality, and any `required` modifiers must match. Any initializing
    formals and super parameters must also be the same in both constructors.

*   The augmenting constructor parameters specify any default values.
    *Default values are defined solely by the introductory constructor.*

*   The introductory constructor is `const` and the augmenting constructor
    is not or vice versa.

*   The introductory constructor is marked `factory` and the augmenting
    constructor is not, or vice versa.

*   The introductory constructor has a super initializer _(super
    constructor invocation at the end of the initializer list)_ and the
    augmenting constructor does too. _An augmentation can replace the
    implicit default `super()` with a concrete super-invocation, but cannot
    replace a declared super constructor._ **(TODO: Why not? We allow
    "replacing implementation", and this is *something* like that.)**

*   The resulting constructor is not valid *(it has a redirection as well as
    some initializer list elements, or it has multiple `super` initializers,
    etc)*.

*   A non-redirecting constructor augments a constructor which is not
    potentially non-redirecting.

*   A redirecting constructor augments a constructor which is not potentially
    redirecting.

#### Non-redirecting generative constructors

These are probably the most complex constructor, but also the most common.

A non-redirecting generative constructor marked `augment` may:

*   Add or replace the body of the augmented constructor with a new body.

    *   If the augmenting constructor has an explicit block body, then that body
        replaces any existing constructor body.

    *   In the augmenting constructor's body, an `augmented()` call executes the
        augmented constructor's body in the same parameter scope that the
        augmenting body is executing in. The expression has type `void` and
        evaluates to `null`. **(TODO: This is slightly under-specified. We can
        use the current bindings of the parameters of the augmenting constructor
        as the initial binding of parameter variables in the augmented body, or
        we can execute the body in the current *scope*, using the same variables
        as the current body. The latter is not what we do with functions
        elsewhere, and allows the `augmented()` expression to modify local
        variables, but the former introduces different variables than the ones
        that existed when evaluating the initializer list. If the initializer
        list captures variables in closures, that body may not work.)**

    *   Initializer lists _are not_ re-run, they have already executed and
        shouldn't be executed twice. The same goes for initializing formals and
        super parameters.

    *   If a parameter variable is overwritten prior to calling `augmented()`,
        the augmented body will see the updated value, because the parameter
        scope is identical.

    *   Local variables in scope where `augmented()` is evaluated are not in
        scope for the execution of the augmented constructor's body.

*   Add initializers to the initializer list. If the augmenting constructor has
    an initializer list then:

    *   It's a compile-time error if the augmented constructor has
        super-initializer, and the augmenting constructor's initializer list
        also contains a super-initializer.

    *   Otherwise the result of applying the augmenting constructor has an
        initializer list containing first the assertions and field initializers
        of the augmented constructor, if any, then the assertions and field
        initializers of the augmenting constructor, and finally any
        super-initializer of either the augmeted or augmenting constructor.

#### Non-redirecting factory constructors

A non-redirecting factory constructor marked `augment` works in the same way as
a normal function augmentation.

If it has a body, it replaces the body of the augmented constructor (if
present), and it may invoke the augmented body by calling
`augmented(arguments)`.

#### Redirecting generative constructors

A redirecting generative constructor marked `augment` adds its redirection
to the augmented constructor.

This converts it into a redirecting generative constructor, removing the
potentially non-redirecting property of the constructor.

It is a compile-time error if:

*   The augmented constructor has any initializers or a body.

#### Redirecting factory constructors

A redirecting factory constructor marked `augment` adds its factory redirection
*(e.g., `= C<int>.name`)* to the augmented constructor.

The result of applying the augmenting constructor is a redirecting factory
constructor with the same target constructor designation as the augmenting
constructor. This removes the potentially non-redirecting property of the
constructor.

It is a compile-time error if:

*   The augmented factory constructor has a body.

#### Extension types

When augmenting an extension type declaration, the parenthesized clause where
the representation type is specified is treated as a constructor that has a
single positional parameter, a single initializer from the parameter to the
representation field, and an empty body. The representation field clause must
be present on the declaration which introduces the extension type, and must be
omitted from all augmentations of the extension type.

This means that an augmentation can add a body to an extension type's implicit
constructor, which isn't otherwise possible. This is done by augmenting the
constructor in the body of the extension type. *Note that there is no
guarantee that any instance of an extension type will have necessarily executed
that body, since you can get instances of extension types through casts or other
conversions that sidestep the constructor.* For example:

```dart
extension type A(int b) {
  augment A(int b) {
    assert(b > 0);
  }
}
```

*This is designed in anticipation of supporting [primary constructors][] on
other types in which case the extension type syntax will then be understood by
users to be a primary constructor for the extension type.*

The extension type's representation object is _not_ a variable, even though it
looks and behaves much like one, and it cannot be augmented as such. It is a
compile time error to have any augmenting declaration with the same name as the
representation object.

It is a compile time error if:

*   An extension type augmentation contains a representation field clause.

[primary constructors]:
https://github.com/dart-lang/language/blob/main/working/2364%20-%20primary%20constructors/feature-specification.md

### Augmenting external members

When augmenting an `external` member, it is assumed that a real implementation
of that member has already been filled by some tool prior to any augmentations
being applied. Thus, it is allowed to use `augmented` from augmenting members
on external declarations, but it may throw a `NoSuchMethodError` error at
runtime if no implementation was in fact provided.

**NOTE**: Macros should _not_ be able to statically tell if an external body has
been filled in by a compiler, because it could lead to a different result on
different platforms or tools.

**TODO: Should we add a syntax to let the augmentation dynamically detect
whether there is an external implementation to call?**

### Augmenting with metadata annotations and doc comments

All declarations can be augmented with metadata annotations and/or doc comments
directly preceding an augmenting declaration.

In both cases, these should be appended to existing metadata or doc comments. For
metadata annotations, these may trigger additional macro applications.

## Scoping

The static and instance member namespaces for a type or extension declaration,
augmenting or not, are lexical only. Only the declarations (augmenting or not)
declared inside the actual declaration are part of the lexical scope that
member declarations are resolved in.

_This means that a static or instance member declared in the augmented
declaration of a class is not *lexically* in scope in a corresponding
augmenting declaration of that class, just as an inherited instance member
is not in the lexical scope of a class declaration._

If a member declaration needs to reference a static or instance member
declared in another introductory or augmenting declaration of the same
type, it can use `this.name` for instance members an `TypeName.name` for
static members to be absolutely sure. Or it can rely on the default if
`name` is not in the lexical scope at all, in which case it’s interpreted
as `this.name` if it occurs inside a scope where a `this` is
available. _This approach is always potentially dangerous, since any
third-party import adding a declaration with the same name would break the
code. In practice that’s almost never a problem, because instance members
and top-level declarations usually use different naming strategies._

Example:

```dart
// Main library "some_lib.dart":
import 'other_lib.dart';

part 'some_augment.dart';

const b = 37;

class C {
  static const int b = 42;
  bool isEven(int n) {
    if (n == 0) return true;
    return !_isOdd(n - 1);
  }
}

// Augmentation "some_augment.dart":
part of 'some_lib.dart';

import 'also_lib.dart';

augment class C {
  bool _isOdd(int n) => !this.isEven(n - 1);
  void printB() { print(b); }  // Prints 37
}
```

This code is fine. Code in `C.isEven` can refer to members added
in the augmentation like `_isOdd()` because there is no other `_isOdd` in
scope, and code in `C._isOdd` works too by explicitly using `this.isEvent` to
ensure it calls the correct method.

You can visualize the namespace nesting sort of like this:

```
some_lib.dart       :
                    :<part of----------
.---------------------------------------.
| import scope:                         |
| other_lib imports                     |
'---------------------------------------'
         ^          :         ^
         |          :         |
         |          : .-----------------.
         |          : | import scope:   |
         |          : | also_lib imports|
         |          : '-----------------'
         |          :         |
.--------------------------------------.
| top-level declaration scope:         |
| const b = 37                         |
| class C (fully augmented class)      |
|                                      |
'--------------------------------------'
         ^          :         ^
         |          :         |
.-----------------. : .----------------.
| class C         | : | augment class C|
| const b = 42    | : | _isOdd()       |
| isEven()        | : |                |
'-----------------' : '----------------'
         ^          |         ^
         |          |         |
.-----------------. | .-----------------.
| C.isEven() body | | | C._isOdd() body |
'-----------------' | '-----------------'
```

Each part files has its own combined import scope, extending that of its
parent, and its own member declarations scopes for each declared member,
introducing a lexical scope for the declaration’s contents. In the middle, each
passes through the shared library declaration namespaces for the top-level
instances themselves.

It is a compile time error for both a static and instance member of the same
name to be defined on the same type, even if they live in different lexical
scopes. You cannot work around this restriction by moving the static member
out to an augmentation, even though it would result in an unambiguous resolution
for references to those members.

## Syntax

The grammar changes are fairly simple. The grammar is modified to allow an
`augment` modifier before various declarations:

```
topLevelDeclaration ::= classDeclaration
  | mixinDeclaration
  | extensionTypeDeclaration
  | extensionDeclaration
  | enumType
  | typeAlias
  | 'augment'? 'external' functionSignature ';'
  | 'augment'? 'external' getterSignature ';'
  | 'augment'? 'external' setterSignature ';'
  | 'augment'? 'external' finalVarOrType identifierList ';'
  | 'augment'? functionSignature (functionBody | ';')
  | 'augment'? getterSignature (functionBody | ';')
  | 'augment'? setterSignature (functionBody | ';')
  | 'augment'? ('final' | 'const') type? initializedIdentifierList ';'
  | 'augment'? 'late' 'final' type? initializedIdentifierList ';'
  | 'augment'? 'late'? varOrType initializedIdentifierList ';'

classDeclaration ::= 'augment'? (classModifiers | mixinClassModifiers)
    'class' typeWithParameters superclass? interfaces?
    memberedDeclarationBody
  | 'augment'? classModifiers 'mixin'? 'class' mixinApplicationClass

mixinDeclaration ::= 'augment'? 'base'? 'mixin' typeIdentifier
  typeParameters? ('on' typeNotVoidNotFunctionList)? interfaces?
  memberedDeclarationBody

extensionDeclaration ::=
    'extension' typeIdentifierNotType? typeParameters? 'on' type
    memberedDeclarationBody
  | 'augment' 'extension' typeIdentifierNotType typeParameters?
    memberedDeclarationBody

extensionTypeDeclaration ::=
    'extension' 'type' 'const'? typeIdentifier
    typeParameters? representationDeclaration interfaces?
    memberedDeclarationBody
  | 'augment' 'extension' 'type' typeIdentifier typeParameters? interfaces?
    memberedDeclarationBody

enumType ::= 'augment'? 'enum' typeIdentifier
  typeParameters? mixins? interfaces?
  '{' enumEntry (',' enumEntry)* (',')?
  (';' memberDeclarations)? '}'

typeAlias ::= 'augment'? 'typedef' typeIdentifier typeParameters? '=' type ';'
  | 'augment'? 'typedef' functionTypeAlias

memberedDeclarationBody ::= '{' memberDeclarations '}'

memberDeclarations ::= (metadata memberDeclaration)*

memberDeclaration ::= 'augment'? declaration ';'
  | 'augment'? methodSignature functionBody

enumEntry ::= metadata 'augment'? identifier argumentPart?
  | metadata 'augment'? identifier typeArguments?
    '.' identifierOrNew arguments

declaration ::= 'external'? factoryConstructorSignature
  | 'external' constantConstructorSignature
  | 'external' constructorSignature
  | 'external'? 'static'? getterSignature
  | 'external'? 'static'? setterSignature
  | 'external'? 'static'? functionSignature
  | 'external' ('static'? finalVarOrType | 'covariant' varOrType) identifierList
  | 'external'? operatorSignature
  | 'abstract' (finalVarOrType | 'covariant' varOrType) identifierList
  | 'static' 'const' type? initializedIdentifierList
  | 'static' 'final' type? initializedIdentifierList
  | 'static' 'late' 'final' type? initializedIdentifierList
  | 'static' 'late'? varOrType initializedIdentifierList
  | 'covariant' 'late' 'final' type? identifierList
  | 'covariant' 'late'? varOrType initializedIdentifierList
  | 'late'? 'final' type? initializedIdentifierList
  | 'late'? varOrType initializedIdentifierList
  | redirectingFactoryConstructorSignature
  | constantConstructorSignature (redirection | initializers)?
  | constructorSignature (redirection | initializers)?
```

It is a compile-time error if:

*   A declaration marked `augment` is also marked `external`. **(TODO: Probably
    remove for functions, so change to "A variable declaration". A macro should
    be able to implement a method as an external with a `@JS()` annotation.)**

## Static semantics

The application of augmentation declarations to an augmented declaration
produces something that looks and behaves like a single declaration: It has
a single name, a single type or function signature, and it’s what all
references to the *name* refers to inside and outside of the library.

Unlike before, that single *semantic declaration* now consists of multiple
*syntactic* declarations (one introductory declaration, the rest augmenting
declarations, with a given augmentation application order), and the properties
of the combined semantic declaration can be derived from the syntactic
declarations.

We redefine a number of semantic functions to now work on a *stack* of
declarations (the declarations for a name in bottom to top order), so that
existing semantic definitions keep working.

### Example: Class declarations

#### Super-declarations

The specification of class modifiers introduced a number of predicates on
*declarations*, to check whether the type hierarchy is well formed and the
class modifiers are as required, before the static semantics have even
introduced *types* yet. We modify those predicates to apply to a stack of
augmenting declarations and an introductory declaration as follows:

*   A a non-empty *stack* of syntactic class declarations, *C*, has a
    declaration *D* as *declared super-class* if:
    *   *C* starts with an (augmenting or not) class declaration *C0* and either
        *   *C0* has an `extends` clause whose type clause denotes the
            declaration *D*, or
        *   *C0* is an augmenting declaration, so *C* continues with a
            non-empty *C<sub>rest</sub>*, and *C<sub>rest</sub>* has *D* as
            declared super-class.
*   A a non-empty *stack* of syntactic class declarations, *C*, has a
    declaration *D* as *declared super-interface* if:
    *   *C* starts with an (augmenting or not) class declaration *C0* and either
        *   *C0* has an `implements` clause with an entry whose type clause
            denotes the declaration *D*, or
        *   *C0* is an augmenting declaration, so *C* continues with a
            non-empty *C<sub>rest</sub>*, and *C<sub>rest</sub>* has *D* as
            declared super-interface.
*   A a non-empty *stack* of syntactic class declarations, *C*, has a
    declaration *D* as *declared super-mixin* if:
    *   *C* starts with an (augmenting or not) class declaration *C0* and either
        *   *C0* has a `with` clause with an entry whose type clause denotes
            the  declaration *D*, or
        *   *C0* is an augmenting declaration, so *C* continues with a
            non-empty *C<sub>rest</sub>*, and *C<sub>rest</sub>* has *D* as
            declared super-mixin.

#### Members

A class declaration stack, *C*, of a one non-augmenting and zero or more
augmenting class declarations, defines an *augmented interface* (member
signatures) and *augmented implementation* (instance members declarations)
based on the individual syntactic declarations.

A non-empty class declaration stack, *C*, has the following set of instance
member declarations:

*   Let *C<sub>top</sub>* be the latest declaration of the stack, and
    *C<sub>rest</sub>* the rest of the stack.
*   If *C<sub>top</sub>* is a non-augmenting declaration, the declarations of
    *C* is the set of syntactic instance member declarations of
    *C<sub>top</sub>*.
*   Otherwise let *P* be the set of member declarations of the non-empty stack
    *C<sub>rest</sub>*.
*   and the member declarations of *C* is the set *R* defined as containing
    only the following elements:
    *   A singleton stack of each syntactic instance member declaration *M* of
        *C<sub>top</sub>*, where *M* is a non-augmenting declaration.
    *   The elements *N* of *P* where *C<sub>top</sub>* does not contain an
        augmenting instance member declaration with the same name _(mutable
        variable declarations have both a setter and a getter name)_.
    *   The stacks of a declaration *M* on top of the stack *N*, where *N* is a
        member of *P*, *M* is an augmenting instance member declaration of
        *C<sub>top</sub>*, and *M* has the same name as *N*.

And we can whether such an instance member declaration stack, *C*, *defines an
abstract method* as:

*   Let *C<sub>top</sub>* be the latest element of the stack and
    *C<sub>rest</sub>* the rest of the stack.
*   If *C<sub>top</sub>* is a non-variable declaration, and is not declared
    `abstract`, the *C* doe
*   If *C<sub>top</sub>* declares a function body, then *C* does not define an
    abstract method.
*   Otherwise *C* defines an abstract method if *C<sub>rest</sub>* defines an
    abstract method.

(This is just for methods, we will define it more generally for members,
including variable declarations.)

### Example: Instance methods

#### Properties

Similarly we can define the properties of stacks of member declarations.

For example, we define the *augmented parameter list* of a non-empty stack,
*C*, of augmentations on an introductory function declaration as:

*   Let *C<sub>top</sub>* be the latest element of the stack and
    *C<sub>rest</sub>* the rest of the stack.
*   If *C<sub>top</sub>* is not an augmenting declaration, its augmented
    parameter list is its actual parameter list. _(And *C<sub>rest</sub>* is
    known to be empty.)_
*   Otherwise *C<sub>top</sub>* is an augmenting declaration with a parameter
    list which must have the same parameters (names, positions, optionality and
    types) as its augmented declaration, except that it is not allowed to
    declare default values for optional parameters.
    *   Let *P* be the augmented parameter list of *C<sub>rest</sub>*.
    *   The augmented parameter list of *C<sub>top</sub>* is then the parameter
        list of *C<sub>top</sub>*, updated by adding to each optional parameter
        the default value of the corresponding parameter in *P*, if any.

_This will usually be exactly the parameter list of the introductory
declaration, but the ordering of named parameters may differ. This is mostly
intended as an example, in practice the augmented parameter list can just be
the parameter list of the introductory declaration, but it’s more
direct and clearly correct to use the actual parameter list of the declaration
when creating the parameter scope that its body will run in._

Similarly we define the _augmented function type_ of the declaration stack.
Because of the restrictions we place on augmentations, they will all have the
same function type as the introductory declaration, but again it’s
simpler to assign a function type to every declaration.

#### Invocation

When invoking an instance member on an object, the current specification looks
up the corresponding implementation on the class of the runtime-type of the
receiver, traversing super-classes, until it it finds a non-abstract
declaration or needs to search past `Object`. The specification then defines
how to invoke that method declaration, with suitable contexts and bindings.

We still define the same thing, only the result of lookup is not a single
declaration, but a stack of augmenting declarations on top of an
introductory declaration, and while searching, we skip past *declaration
stacks* that define an abstract method. The resulting stack is the *member
definition*, or *semantic declaration*, which is derived from the syntactic
declarations in the source.

Invoking a *stack*, *C*, of instance method declarations on a receiver object
*o* with an argument list *A* and type arguments *T*, is then defined as
follows:

*   Let *C<sub>top</sub>* be the latest declaration on the stack (the last
    applied augmentation in augmentation application order), and
    *C*<sub>*rest*</sub> the rest of the stack.
*   If *C<sub>top</sub>* has a function body *B* then:
    *   Bind actuals to formals (using the usual definition of that), binding
        the argument list *A* and type arguments *T* to the *augmented
        parameter list* of *C*<sub>*top*</sub> and type parameters of
        *C<sub>top</sub>*. This creates a runtime parameter scope which has the
        runtime class scope as parent scope (the lexical scope of the class,
        except that type parameters of the class are bound to the runtime type
        arguments of those parameters for the instance *o*).
    *   Execute the body *B* in this parameter scope, with `this` bound to *o*.
    *   If *B* contains an expression of the form `augmented<TypeArgs>(args)`
        (type arguments omitted if empty), then:
        *   The static type of `augmented` is the augmented function type of
            *C<sub>rest</sub>*. The expression is type-inferred as a function
            value invocation of a function with that static type.
        *   To evaluate the expression, evaluate `args` to an argument list
            *A2*, invoke *C<sub>rest</sub>* with argument list *A2* and type
            arguments that are the types of `TypeArgs`. The result of
            `augmented<TypeArgs>(args)` is the same as the result of that
            invocation (returned value or thrown error).
    *   _There would have been a compile-time error if there is no earlier
        declaration with a body._
    *   The result of invoking *C* is the returned or thrown result of
        executing *B*.
*   Otherwise, the result of the invocation of *C* is the result of invoke
    *C<sub>rest</sub>* on *o* with argument list *A* and type arguments *T*.
    *   _This will eventually find a body to execute, otherwise *C* would have
        defined an abstract method, and would not have been invoked to begin
        with._

## Documentation comments

Documentation comments are allowed in all the standard places in library
augmentations. It is up to the tooling to decide how to present such
documentation comments to the user, but they should generally be considered to
be additive, and should not completely override the original comment. In other
words, it is not the expectation that augmentations should duplicate the
original documentation comments, but instead provide comments that are specific
to the augmentation.

## Changelog

### 1.34

*   Revert some errors introduced in version 1.28.

    *   An abstract variable can now be augmented with non-abstract getters and
        setters.
    *   External variables can now be augmented with abstract getters and
        setters.

### 1.33

*   Change the grammar to remove the primary constructor parts of an
    augmenting extension type declaration.

### 1.32

*   Specify that variables which require an initializer can have it defined
    in any augmentation.
*   Specify that the implicit null initialization is not applied until after
    augmentation.

### 1.31

*   Specify that it is an error to have a static and instance member with the
    same name in the fully merged declaration.

### 1.30

*   Simplify extension type augmentations, don't allow them to contain the
    representation type at all.

### 1.29

*   Simplify enum value augmentations, no longer allow altering the
    constructor invocation.

### 1.28

*   Explicitly disallow augmenting abstract variables with non-abstract
    variables, getters, or setters.
*   Explicitly disallow augmenting external declarations with abstract
    declarations.
*   Remove error when augmenting an abstract or external variable with a
    variable (allowed for adding comments/annotations).

### 1.27

*   Specify that representation objects for extension types cannot be augmented.

### 1.26

*   Recreate the change made in 1.23 (which was undone by accident).

### 1.25

*   Clarify that augmentations can occur in the same type-introducing
    declaration body, even in a non-augmenting declaration.
*   Update some occurrences of old terminology with new terms.

### 1.24

*   Allow augmentations which only alter the metadata and/or doc comments on
    various types, and specify behavior.

### 1.23

*   Change `augmented` operator invocation syntax to be function call syntax.

### 1.22

*   Unify augmentation libraries and parts.
    [Parts with imports specification][parts_with_imports.md] moved into
    separate document, as a stand-alone feature that is not linked to
    augmentations.
*   Augmentation declarations can occur in any file, whether a library or
    part file. Must occur "below" the introductory declaration (later in
    same file or sub-part) and "after" any prior applied augmentation that
    it modifies (below, or in a later sub-part of a shared ancestor).
*   Suggest a stronger ordering *lint*, where the augmentation must be "below"
    the augmentation it is applied after. That imples that all declarations with
    the same name are on the same path in the library file tree, so that
    reordering `part` directives does not change augmentation application order.
*   Change the lexical scope of augmenting class-like declarations to only
    contain the member declarations that are syntactically inside the same
    declaration, rather than collecting all member declarations from all
    augmenting or non-augmenting declarations with the same name, and making
    them all available in each declaration.
*   Avoid defining a syntactic merging, since it requires very careful scope
    management, which isn’t necessary if we can just extend properties that are
    currently defined for single declarations to the combination of a
    declaration plus zero or more augmentations.

### 1.21

*   Add a compile-time errors for wrong usages of `augmented`.

### 1.20

*   Change the `extensionDeclaration` grammar rule such that an augmenting
    extension declaration cannot have an `on` clause. Adjust other rules
    accordingly.

### 1.19

*   Change the phrase 'augmentation library' to 'library augmentation',
    to be consistent with the rename which was done in 1.15.

### 1.18

*   Add a grammar rule for `enumEntry`, thus allowing them to have the
    keyword `augment`.

### 1.17

*   Introduce compile-time errors about wrong structures in the graph of
    libraries and augmentation libraries formed by directives like `import`
    and `import augment` (#3646).

### 1.16

*   Update grammar rules and add support for augmented type declarations of
    all kinds (class, mixin, extension, extension type, enum, typedef).

*   Specify augmenting extension types. Clarify that primary constructors
    (which currently only exist for extension types) can be augmented like
    other constructors (#3177).

### 1.15

*   Change `library augment` to `augment library`.

### 1.14

*   Change `augment super` to `augmented`.

### 1.13

*   Clarify which clauses are (not) allowed in augmentations of certain
    declarations.
*   Allow adding an `extends` clause in augmentations.

### 1.12

*   Update the behavior for variable augmentations.

### 1.11

*   Alter and clarify the semantics around augmenting external declarations.
*   Allow non-abstract classes to have implicitly abstract members which are
    implemented in an augmentation.

### 1.10

*   Make `augment` a built-in identifier.

### 1.9

*   Specify that documentation comments are allowed, and should be considered to
    be additive and not a complete override of the original comment. The rest of
    the behavior is left up to implementations and not specified.

### 1.8

*   Specify that augmented libraries and their augmentations must have the same
    language version.

*   Specifically call out that augmentations can add and augment enum values,
    and specify how that works.

### 1.7

*   Specify that augmentations must contain all the same keywords as the
    original declaration (and no more).

### 1.6

*   Allow class augmentations to use different names for type parameters. This
    isn't particular valuable, but is consistent with functions augmentations
    which are allowed to change the names of positional parameters.

*   Specify that a non-augmenting declaration must occur before any
    augmentations of it, in merge order.

*   Specify that augmentations can't have parts (#2057).

### 1.5

*   Augmentation libraries share the same top-level declaration and private
    scope with the augmented library and its other augmentations.

*   Now that enums have members, allow them to be augmented.

*   Compile-time error if a non-`late` augmenting instance variable calls the
    initializer for a `late` one.

### 1.4

*   When inferring the type of a variable, only the original variable's
    initializer is used.

### 1.3

*   Constructor and function augmentations can't define default values.

### 1.2

*   Specify that augmenting constructor initializers are inserted before the
    original constructor's super or redirecting initializer if present (#2062).
*   Specify that an augmenting type must replicate the original type's type
    parameters (#2058).
*   Allow augmenting declarations to add metadata annotations and macro
    applications (#2061).

### 1.1

*   Make it an error to apply the same augmentation multiple times (#1957).
*   Clarify type parameters and parameter modifiers in function signature
    matching (#2059).

### 1.0

Initial version.
