# Macros

Authors: Jacob MacDonald, Bob Nystrom

Status: **Work In Progress**

### Changelog

- *2022/01/25:* Specify that identifiers in strings can only refer to local
  declarations.

## Introduction

The [motivation][] document explains why we are working on static
metaprogramming. This proposal introduces macros to Dart. A **macro** is a piece
of code that can modify other parts of the program at compile time. A **macro
application** invokes the given macro on the declaration it is applied to. The
macro **introspects** over the declaration it was applied to and based on that
**generates code** to modify the declaration or add new ones.

A **macro declaration** is a user-defined Dart class that implements one or more
new built-in macro interfaces. Macros in Dart are written in normal imperative
Dart code. There is not a separate "macro language".

[motivation]: motivation.md

You can think of macros as exposing functionality similar to existing [code
generation tools][codegen], but integrated more fully into the language.

[codegen]: https://dart.dev/tools/build_runner

### Introspection

Most macros don't simply generate new code from scratch. Instead, they add code
to a library based on existing properties of the program. For example, a macro
that adds JSON serialization to a class might look at the fields the class
declares and from that synthesize a `toJson()` method that serializes those
fields to a JSON object.

This means that when a macro executes, it often **introspects** over some part
of the program to look at its existing structure. A macro can look at the
declaration that it is applied to. For example, a macro applied to a class can
see the class's name, superclasses, members, etc. Some of those properties are
type annotations, like the superclass or the return type of a method. From that
type annotation, the macro may be able to traverse to the declaration that the
annotation refers to. In this way, a macro applied to one part of the program
may ultimately access information about distant parts of the program.

Allowing deep introspection like this in cases where a macro needs it while
ensuring that users can understand the system and tools can implement it
efficiently is a central challenge of this proposal.

### Ordering in metaprogramming

Macros can read the user's Dart program and modify it. They are also written in
Dart as part of the same program. When you have lots of macros all looking at
and modifying the same program while it is in the middle of being compiled, it
can be hard to define a coherent compilation and macro expansion order. Can a
macro body call a method generated by another macro? Does a macro that looks at
the fields on a class see the fields generated by some other macro?

The rest of the proposal addresses these specific ordering challenges in detail,
but the basic principles are:

1.  When possible, macro application order is *not* user-visible. Most macro
    applications are isolated from each other. This makes it easier for users to
    reason about them separately, and gives implementations freedom to evaluate
    (or re-evaluate) them in whatever order is most efficient.

1.  When users apply macros to the *same* portions of the program where the
    ordering is important, they can easily *control* that ordering.

In other words, in cases where you care about the order that macros run, you
should be able to control it to get what you want. And in most other cases, the
system should ensure that you don't have to care.

## Macro applications

Macros are applied to declarations using the existing metadata annotation
syntax. For example:

```dart
@myCoolMacro
class MyClass {}
```

Here, if `myCoolMacro` resolves to an instance of a class implementing one or
more of the macro interfaces, then the annotation is treated as an application
of the `myCoolMacro` macro to the class MyClass.

Macro applications can also be passed arguments, either in the form of
[Code][] expressions or certain types of literal values. See
[Macro Arguments](#Macro-arguments) for more information on how these arguments
are handled when executing macros.

### Code Arguments

Consider this example macro application:

```dart
int get a => 1;
const b = 2;

class SomeClass {
  @Add(1, a + b)
  int addThem(); // Generates: => 1 + a + b;
}
```

Here, `Add` is a macro that takes its arguments as expressions and produces a
function body that adds them using `+` and returns the result.

Because macros are applied at compile time, the arguments are passed to the
macro as objects representing unevaluated expressions. Here, the `Add` macro
receives objects that represent the *literal* `1` and *the expression* `a + b`.
It takes those and composes them into a function body like:

```dart
=> 1 + a + b
```

Most of the time, like here, a macro takes the arguments you pass it and
interpolates them back into code that it generates, so passing the arguments as
code is what you want.

### Value arguments

Sometimes, though, the macro wants to receive an actual argument value. For
example, a macro for defining vector classes might take the dimension as an
integer and need to know the actual passed integer value at compile time to know
how many fields to define. To support that, macros can also accept arguments as
values. However, only built-in value types (int, bool, etc.) are allowed and
arguments must be *simple literal expressions*.

**TODO**: Metadata annotations currently only allow expression arguments. Do we
want to expand this to allow statements or other grammatical constructs (#1928)?

### Application order

Multiple macros may be applied to the same declaration, or to declarations that
contain one another. For example, you may apply two macros to the same class, or
to a class and a method in the same class. Since those macros may introspect
over the declaration as well as modify it, the order that those macros are
applied can matter.

Fortunately, since they are all applied to the same textual piece of code, the
user can *control* that order. We use syntactic order to control application
order of macros:

*   **Macros are applied to inner declarations before outer ones.** Macros
    applied to members are applied before members on the surrounding type.
    Macros on top-level declarations are applied before macros on the main
    `library` directive.

*   **Macros applied to the same declaration are applied right to left.** For
    example:

    ```dart
    @third
    @second
    @first
    class C {}
    ```

    Here, the macros applied to C are run `first`, `second`, then `third`.

*   **Macros are applied to superclasses, mixins, and interfaces first, in**
    **Phase 2** For example:

    ```dart
    @third
    class B extends A with C implements D {}

    @second
    class A implements C {}

    @first
    class C {}

    @first
    class D {}
    ```

    Here, the macros on `A`, `C` and `D` run before the macros on `B`, and `C`
    also runs before `A`. But otherwise the ordering is not defined (it is not
    observable).

    This only applies to Phase 2, because it is the only phase where the order
    would be observable. In particular this allows macros running on `B` to see
    any members added to its super classes, mixins, or interfaces, by other
    macros running in phase 2.

Aside from these rules, macro introspection is limited so that evaluation order
is not user visible. For example, if two macros are applied to two methods in
the same class, there is no way for those macros to interfere with each other
such that the application order can be detected.

## Phases

Before we can get into how macro authors create macros, there is another
ordering problem to discuss. Imagine you have these two classes for tracking
pets and their humans:

```dart
@jsonSerializable
class Human {
  final String name;
  final Pet? pet; // Optional, might not have a pet.
}

@jsonSerializable
class Pet {
  final String name;
  final Owner? owner; // Optional, might be feral.
}
```

You want to be able to save these to the cloud, so you use a `@jsonSerializable`
macro that generates a `toJson()` method on each class the macro is applied to.
You want the methods to look like this:

```dart
class Human {
  ...
  Map<String, Object?> toJson() => {
    'name': name,
    'pet': pet?.toJson(),
  };
}

class Pet {
  ...
  Map<String, Object?> toJson() => {
    'name': name,
    'owner': owner?.toJson(),
  };
}
```

Note that the `pet` and `owner` fields are serialized by recursively calling
their `toJson()` methods. To generate that code, the `@jsonSerializable` macro
needs to look at the type of each field to see if it declares a `toJson()`
method. The problem is that there is *no* order of macro application that will
give the right result. If we apply `@jsonSerializable` to Human first, then it
won't call `toJson()` on `pet` because Pet doesn't have a `toJson()` method yet.
We get the opposite problem if we apply the macro to Pet first.

To address this, macros execute in **phases.** Earlier phases declare new types
and declarations while later phases fill them in. This way, we can declare the
existence of *all* of the `toJson()` methods in the above example before
generating the *bodies* of any of those `toJson()` methods where we need to
introspect over the fields.

In each phase, macros only have access to the parts of the program that are
already complete. This ensures that the evaluation order of unrelated macro
applications is not user visible. Each phase produces information accessible to
later phases. As the program is incrementally "pinned down", later phases gain
more introspective power, but have less power to mutate the program.

There are three phases:

### Phase 1: Types

Here, macros contribute new types to the program&mdash;classes, typedefs, enums,
etc. This is the only phase where a macro can introduce a new visible name into
the top level scope.

**Note**: Macro classes _cannot_ be generated in this way, but they can rely on
macro generated declarations for their implementation. This ensures that all
macros can be discovered prior to actually running any macros.

Very little introspective power is provided in this phase. Since other macros
may also be declaring new types, we can't even assume that all top-level
identifiers can be resolved. You can see the *names* of types that are
referenced in the declaration the macro is applied to, but you can't ask if they
are a subtype of a known type. Type hierarchies have not been resolved yet. Even
a type which could be resolved to an existing type might not actually resolve to
that type once macros are done (a new type could be introduced which shadows the
original one).

After this phase completes, all top-level names are declared. Subsequent phases
know exactly which type any named reference resolves to, and can ask questions
about subtype relations.

### Phase 2: Declarations

In this phase, macros declare functions, variables, and members. "Declaring"
here means specifying the name and type signature, but not the body of a
function or initializer for a variable. In other words, macros in this phase
specify the declarative structure but no imperative code.

When applied to a class, a macro in this phase can introspect on all of the
members of that class and its superclasses, but it cannot introspect on the
members of other types.

### Phase 3: Definitions

In the final phase, macros provide the imperative code to fill in abstract or
external members. Macros in this phase can also wrap existing methods or
constructors, by injecting some code before and/or after those method bodies.
These statements share a scope with each other, but not with the original
function body.

Phase three macros can add new supporting declarations to the surrounding scope,
but these are private to the macro generated code, and never show up in
introspection APIs. These macros can fully introspect on any type reachable from
the declarations they are applied to, including introspecting on members of
classes, etc.

## Macro declarations

Macros are a special type of class, which are preceded by the `macro` keyword,
and have some additional limitations that classes don't have.

This keyword allows compilers (and users) to identify macros at a glance,
without having to check the type hierarchy to see if they implement `Macro`.

See some example macros [here][examples].

[examples]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/tree/master/working/macros/example

### Macro limitations/requirements

-  All macro constructors must be marked as const.
-  See the [Macro Arguments](#Macro-arguments) section to understand how macro
constructors are invoked, and their limitations.
-  All macros must implement at least one of the `Macro` interfaces.
-  Macros cannot be abstract.
-  Macro classes cannot be generated by other macros.

*Note: The Macro API is still being designed, and lives [here][api].*

[api]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/blob/master/working/macros/api

### Writing a Macro

Every macro interface is a subtype of a root [Macro][] [marker interface][].
There are interfaces for each kind of declaration macros can be applied to:
class, function, etc. Then, for each of those, there is an interface for each
macro phase: type, declaration, and definition. A single macro class can
implement as many of these interfaces as it wants to. This allows a single macro
to participate in multiple phases and to support being applied to multiple kinds
of declarations.

[Macro]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/blob/master/working/macros/api/macros.dart
[marker interface]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marker_interface_pattern

Each macro interface declares a single method that the macro class must
implement in order to apply the macro in a given phase on a given declaration.
For example, a macro applied to classes in the declaration phase implements
`ClassDeclarationsMacro` and its `buildDeclarationsForClass` method.

When a Dart implementation executes macros, it invokes these builder methods at
the appropriate phase for the declarations the macro is applied to. Each builder
method is passed two arguments which give the macro the context and capabilities
it needs to introspect over the program and generate code.

### Declaration argument

The first argument to a builder method is an object describing the
declaration it is applied to. This argument contains only essentially the parsed
AST for the declaration itself, and does not include nested declarations.

For example, in `ClassDeclarationsMacro`, the introspection object is a
`ClassDeclaration`. This gives you access to the name of the class and access
to the immediate superclass, as well as any immediate mixins or interfaces,
but _not_ its members or entire class hierarchy.

### Builder argument

The second argument is an instance of a [builder][] class. It exposes both
methods to contribute new code to the program, as well as phase specific
introspection capabilities.

In `ClassDeclarationsMacro`, the builder is a `ClassDeclarationBuilder`. Its
primary method is `declareInClass`, which the macro can call to add a new member
to the class. It also implements the `ClassIntrospector` interface, which allows
you to get the members of the class, as well as its entire class hierarchy.

[builder]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/blob/master/working/macros/api/builders.dart

### Introspecting on metadata annotations

Prior to macros, most use of metadata annotations in Dart was to guide code
generation tools or static analysis. The tool would look for certain metadata
annotations in order to know how to generate code or produce custom diagnosics.
With macros, many of those metadata annotations would instead either *become*
macros or be *read* by them. The latter means that macros also need to be able
to introspect over non-macro metadata annotations applied to declarations.

For example, a `@jsonSerialization` class macro might want to look for an
`@unseralized` annotation on fields to exclude them from serialization.

**TODO**: The following subsections read more like a design discussion that a
proposal. Figure out what we want to do here and rewrite (#1930).

#### The annotation introspection API

We could try to give users access to an actual instance of the annotation, or
we could give something more like the [DartObject][] class from the analyzer.

[DartObject]: https://pub.dev/documentation/analyzer/latest/dart_constant_value/DartObject-class.html

Since annotations may contain references to types or identifiers that the macro
does not import, we choose to expose a more abstract API (similar to
[DartObject][]).

**TODO**: Define the exact API.

#### Annotations that require macro expansion

This could happen if the annotation class has macros applied to it, or if
some argument(s) to the annotation constructor use macros.

Because macros are not allowed to generate code that shadows an identifier
in the same library, we know that if an annotation class or any arguments to it
could be resolved, then we can assume that resolution is correct.

This allows us to provide an API for macro authors to attempt to evaluate an
annotation in _any phase_. The API may fail (if it requires more macro
expansion to be done), but that is not expected to be a common situation. In
the case where it does fail, users should typically be able to move some of
their code to a separate library (which they import). Then things from that
library can safely be used in annotations in the current library, and evaluated
by macros.

Evaluation must fail if there are any macros left to be expanded on the
annotation class or any arguments to the annotation constructor.

#### Are macro applications introspectable?

Macro applications share the same syntax as annotations, and users may expect
macros to be able to see the other macros as a result.

For now we are choosing not to expose other macro applications as if they were
metadata. While they do share a syntax they are conceptually different.

#### Modifying metadata annotations

We will not allow modification or removal of existing annotations, in the same
way that we do not allow modification or removal of existing code.

However, there are potentially situations where it would be useful for a macro
to be able to add metadata annotations to existing declarations. These would
then be read in by other macros (or the same macro in a later phase). In
particular this may be useful when composing multiple macros together into a
single macro. That macro may have a different configuration annotation that it
uses, which it then splits up into the specific annotations that the other
macros it uses expect.

However, if we aren't careful then allowing adding metadata in this way would
expose the order in which macros are applied. For this reason metadata which is
added in this way is not visible to any other macros ran in the same phase.

This does have two interesting and possibly unexpected consequences:

- Macros may see different annotations on the same declaration, if they run in
  different phases.
- Metadata on entirely new declarations is visible in the same phase, but
  metadata added to existing declarations is only visible in later phases.

**TODO**: Define the API for adding metadata to existing declarations (#1931).

## Generating code

Macros attach new code to the declaration the macro is applied to by calling
methods on the builder object given to the macro. For example, a
declaration-phase macro applied to a class declaration is given a
[ClassDeclarationBuilder]. That class exposes an [`addToClass()`][addtoclass]
method that adds the given code to the class as a new member.

[addtoclass]: https://jakemac53.github.io/macro_prototype/doc/api/definition/ClassDeclarationBuilder/addToClass.html

The code itself is an instance of a special [Code][] class (or one of its
subclasses). This is a first-class object that represents a well-formed piece of
Dart code. We use this instead of bare strings containing Dart syntax because a
code object carries more than just the bare Dart code. In particular, it keeps
track of how identifiers in the code are resolved.

[Code]: https://jakemac53.github.io/macro_prototype/doc/api/definition/Code-class.html

Also, when code objects are creating by combining fragments of other code (for
example arguments to macros), the resulting code object may keep track of the
original source locations of each fragment. This way, debuggers and other code
navigation tools can understand where a given piece of generated code came from.

### Code instances

There are subclasses of Code for the various major grammatical categories in
Dart syntax: expression, statement, declaration, etc. These exist mainly to
make APIs like the builder classes that accept code objects easier to use
correctly. We do not expose a separate Code subclass for every single grammar
production in Dart: unary expression, binary expression, etc. An API surface
area that broad becomes very brittle and hard to evolve. We wouldn't want the
Code API itself to prevent us from making future language changes.

**TODO**: Describe the API to create instances of Code classes (#1932).

**TODO**: To make it easier to create Code instances, we are considering adding
something like JavaScript's [tagged template][] syntax to Dart. Then, using
that, we could define templates for various grammar productions like expression
and statement. That would make creating code instances almost as simple as
string literals.

[tagged template]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals#tagged_templates

The Code objects themselves are also fairly opaque. They are "write-only".
Macros create them and compose them, but the API does not give macros the
ability to tear apart and introspect into the subcomponents and subexpressions
of a given pieces of syntax.

**TODO**: We are considering exposing more properties on Code objects to allow
introspection (#1933).

### Fragments

Sometimes when building a piece of Dart code for a macro's output, it's
convenient to work with fragments of Dart code that are not themselves valid
complete pieces of Dart syntax. For example, imagine a macro that wraps a given
expression in `{ return ` and `; }`. Those fragments that are prepended and
appended around the expression are not valid standalone productions in the Dart
grammar.

To represent those, we also have a [Fragment][] class. Fragments work more like
unparsed strings. They can be concatenated and composed to produce a Code object
when the result is valid Dart syntax.

[Fragment]: https://jakemac53.github.io/macro_prototype/doc/api/definition/Fragment-class.html

### Identifiers and resolution

The classic problem in macro systems since they were first invented in Lisp and
Scheme in the 70s is how identifiers are resolved. Because this proposal does
not allow local macros, macros that generate new syntax, or macro applications
inside local block scopes, the problems around scoping are somewhat reduced. But
challenges still remain.

#### Referring to generated declarations

A key use of macros is generating new declarations. Since these declarations
aren't useful if not called, it implies that handwritten code may contain
references to declarations produced by macros. This means that before macros are
applied, code may contain identifiers that cannot be resolved.

This is not an error. Any identifier that can't be resolved before the macro is
applied is allowed to be resolved to a macro-produced identifier after macros
are applied. (You might imagine that we could simply defer *all* identifier
resolution until after macro application is done, but we need to resolve at
least enough identifers to resolve *the macro application annotations
themselves*, and to enable the introspection API to describe known types and
members.)

It is a compile-time error if a macro adds a declaration to a library or class
that collides with an existing declaration (either handwritten or produced by a
macro). This is analogous to the existing error users get if handwritten code
has two colliding declarations.

#### Shadowing declarations

All the rules below apply only to the library in which a macro is
applied&mdash;macro applications in imported libraries are considered to be
fully expanded already and are treated exactly the same as handwritten code.

Macros may add member declarations that shadow top-level declarations in the
library. When that happens, we want to ensure that the intent of the
user-written code is clear. Consider the following example:

```dart
int get x => 1;

@generateX
class Bar {
  // Generated: int get x => 2;

  // Should this return the top level `x`, or the generated instance getter?
  int get y => x;
}
```

There are several potential choices we could make here:

1.  Any identifier that can be resolved before macro application keeps its
    original resolution. Here, `x` would still resolve to the original,
    top-level variable.

2.  Re-resolve all identifiers after macros are applied, which may change what
    they resolve to. In the example here, `x` would re-resolve to the generated
    instance getter `x`.

3.  Make it a compile-time error for a macro to introduce an identifier that
    shadows another.

4.  Make it a compile-time error to *use* an identifier shadowed by one produced
    by a macro.

The first two choices could be very confusing to users, some will expect one
behavior while others expect the other. The third choice would work but might be
overly restrictive. The final option still avoids the ambiguity, and is a bit
more permissive than the third, so we take that approach.

It's also possible that a top-level declaration and an instance declaration that
shadows it are *both* produced by macros. If we resolved a hand-written
identifier with the same name at different points during macro expansion, it
might refer to different macro-generated declarations. That would also be
confusing, and we don't want to allow that.

These constraints produce this rule: It is a compile-time error if any
hand-authored identifier in a library containing a macro application would bind
to a different declaration when resolved before and after macro expansion in
that library.

This follows from the general principle that macros should not alter the
meaning of existing code. Adding the getter `x` in the example above shadows the
top-level `x`, changing the meaning of the original code.

Note, that if the getter were written as `int get y => this.x;`, then a macro
*would* be allowed to introduce the new getter `x`, because `this.x` could not
previously be resolved.

**TODO**: Revisit this to see if it aligns with the scoping rules of compiling
macros to library augmentations.

#### Resolving identifiers in generated code

When a macro generates code containing an identifier, the identifier must be
resolved in the context of some namespace to determine what declaration it
refers to. It's not enough to simply resolve generated code in the same
namespace where the macro is applied. The macro author may want to, for example,
generate a call to a utility function that the macro author knows about but that
the library applying the macro is unaware of. Or a macro may want to generate
code that creates an instance of some class that is an implementation detail of
the macro and not in scope where the macro is applied.

To support this, there is an `Identifier` subtype of `Code`. An instance of this
class represents an identifier resolved in the context of a known library's
namespace. When the identifier object is inserted into other generated code,
it retains its original resolution.

*A compiler could implement this by generating an import of the library
containing the declaration that the identifier refers to. The compiler adds a
unique prefix to the import and then the identifier emitted as a prefixed
identifier followed by the identifier's simple name.*

Macros can also generate code from strings. When a `Code` object is created, if
any identifiers appear inside strings or `Fragment`s used to build the code,
they must resolve to local declarations inside that same `Code` object. Code
generated from strings or fragments may not refer to free variables declared
outside of the same `Code` object. To refer to non-local declarations, macro
authors must get an `Identifier` for the declaration.

Macros can get or create `Identifiers` using the introspection API.

**TODO: Define this API. See [here](https://github.com/dart-lang/language/pull/1779#discussion_r683843130).**

### Generating macro applications

Since macros are regular Dart code and classes, one macro can instantiate and
run the other macro's code directly as part of the first macro's execution. That
allows macros to be directly composed in some cases. But in cases where a macro
in one phase wants to invoke a macro in another phase (including itself), a
macro can generate code containing a macro application. Those in turn expanded
during compilation. This is allowed in two ways:

**TODO**: Consider more direct support for macros that declare and then
implement their own declarations (#1908).

#### Adding macro applications to new declarations

When creating [Code][] instances, a macro may generate code which includes
macro applications. These macro applications must be from either the current
phase or a later phase, but cannot be from previous phases.

If a macro application is added which implements an earlier phase, that phase
is not ran. This should result in a warning if the macro does not also
implement some phase that will be ran.

If a macro application is added which runs in the same phase as the current
one, then it is immediately expanded after execution of the current macro,
following the normal ordering rules.

#### Ordering violations

Both of these mechanisms allow for normal macro ordering to be circumvented.
Consider the following example, where all macros run in the Declaration phase:

```dart
@macroA
@macroB
class X {
  @macroC // Added by `@macroA`, runs after both `@macroB` and `@macroA`
  int? a;

  // Generated by `@macroC`, not visible to `@macroB`.
  int? b;
}
```

Normally, macros always run "inside-out". But in this case `@macroC` runs after
both `@macroB` and `@macroC` which were applied to the class.

We still allow this because it doesn't cause any ambiguity in ordering, even
though it violates the normal rules. We could instead only allow adding macros
from *later* phases, but that would restrict the functionality in unnecessary
ways.

## Compiling macros

**TODO**: Explain library cycles and compiling to library augmentations.

### Library cycles

Applying a macro involves executing the Dart code inside the body of the macro.
Obviously, that code must be type-checked and compiled before it can be run. To
ensure that the code defining the macro can be compiled before it's applied, we
have the following restrictions:

*   **A macro cannot be applied in the same library where it is defined.** The
    macro must always be defined in some other library that you import into the
    library where it is applied. This way, the library where the macro is
    defined can be compiled first.

*   **There must be no import path from the library where a macro is defined to
    any library where it is used.** Since the library applying the macro *must*
    import the definition, this is another way of saying that there can't be any
    cyclic imports (directly or indirectly) between the library where a macro is
    defined and any library where it is used. This ensures that we can reliably
    compile the library where the macro is defined first because it doesn't
    depend on any of the libraries using the macro.

**TODO**: Instead of the above rules, we are considering a more formal notion of
"[modules]" or "library groups" to enforce this acyclicity.

[modules]: https://github.com/dart-lang/language/tree/master/working/modules

A Dart implementation can enforce this restriction by organizing a program into
**library cycles**. The build package [already does this][build lib cycle]. A
library cycle is a set of libraries containing import cycles. If two libraries
are not in the same cycle, it is guaranteed that there is no cyclic import
between them.

### Ideal compilation process

Here's a (non-normative) illustration of how a Dart implementation could compile
a Dart program containing macro applications:

#### 1. Break the program into library cycles

Starting at the entrypoint library, traverse all imports, exports, and
augmentation imports to collect the full graph of libraries to be compiled.
Calculate the [strongly connected components][] of this graph. Each component is
a library cycle, and the edges between them determine how the cycles depend on
each other. Sort the library cycles in topological order based on the connected
component graph.

Report an error if macro application and its definition occur in the same
library cycle.

Each library cycle can now be fully compiled separately. When compiling a
library cycle, it is guaranteed that all macros used by the cycle have already
been compiled. Also, any types or other declarations used by that cycle have
either already been compiled, or are defined in that cycle.

[strongly connected components]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strongly_connected_component

#### 2. Compile each cycle

Go through the library cycles in topological order. For each cycle, compile all
of its libraries. First, merge in any hand-authored library augmentations into
their libraries. At this point, you have a set of mutually interdependent
libraries. They may contain references to declarations that don't exist because
macros have yet to produce them.

Collect all the metadata annotations whose names can be resolved and that
resolve to macro classes. Report an error if any application refers to a macro
declared in this cycle.

**TODO**: The above resolution rules may change based on
https://github.com/dart-lang/language/issues/1890.

#### 3. Apply macros

In a sandbox environment or isolate, create an instance of the corresponding
macro class for each macro application. Pass in any macro application arguments
to the macro's constructor. If a parameter's type is `Code` or a subclass,
convert the argument expression to a `Code` object. Any bare identifiers in the
argument expression are converted to `Identifier` instances whose scope is the
library of the macro application.

Run all of the macros in phase order:

1.  Invoke the corresponding visit method for all macros that implement phase 1
    APIs.

1.  Invoke the corresponding visit method for all macros that implement phase 2
    APIs.

1.  Invoke the corresponding visit method for all macros that implement phase 3
    APIs.

While these are running, the macro will likely call back into the host
environment to introspect over code in the current library cycle or previously
compiled cycles. The introspection API is mostly syntactic and structural: a
macro can walk the members on a class declaration or look at the *name* of a
type annotation without the compiler having to do any resolution or type
checking.

When a macro wants to resolve an identifier in a type annotation, there is an
explicit API for that. When that happens, the implementation attempts to resolve
the identifier and return a reference to the resolved declaration. Macros do not
have introspection access to the imperative code of a library, so that code
doesn't need to be resolved or type-checked at this point.

Meanwhile, the macro is also producing new declarations and definitions. These
are collected and held by the macro processor. When introspecting over code, the
implementation needs to show not just the state of the code on disk, but any of
these new declarations produced previously by macros.

#### 4. Generate an augmentation library

Once all macro applications have finished running, the implementation creates a
new empty augmentation library for each library containing macro applications.
All of the declarations created by macros and held by the processor are now
added to the augmentation.

Entirely new declarations are simply added to the augmentation library as
declarations. Declarations that wrap the original declaration's code are added
as augmenting declarations. If a macro adds members to a type, then the type is
added to the augmentation library as an augmenting type, and the members are
added into that.

**TODO**: How are name collisions from private declarations handled?

The `Code` objects representing the signature and body of the declaration is
serialized to Dart source. `Code` objects created from strings are inserted
verbatim into the augmentation library. It's up to the macro author to take
care when using unqualified identifiers in string-based `Code` objects.

**TODO**: Do we want to find identifiers in string-based `Code` objects and
implicitly scope them somehow?

Instances of the `Identifier` class have special serialization. An import for
library that the identifier resolves to is added to the augmentation with a new
unique prefix identifier. The `Identifier` name is then serialized as a prefixed
identifier for that prefix. (A more sophisticated implementation could reuse
imports when multiple identifiers resolve to the same library, and may choose to
omit the prefix entirely if the resulting identifier will still resolve
correctly.)

This augmentation library may be written on disk in some implementation-defined
location. It should be accessible to users so that it's possible to step into
and debug macro-generated code. It should probably *not* be stored directly next
to their source code. We don't expect users to commit these generated files to
source control.

#### 5. Apply augmentation and compile

Finally, the implementation implicitly applies these macro-generated
augmentation libraries onto their corresponding main libraries. After that, all
of the libraries are fully complete. They should contain no unresolvable
identifiers, even in imperative code, and every declared member should have a
definition. Report an error if that's not true.

Otherwise, all of the libraries in the cycle can be fully compiled and the
implementation can move on to the next cycle. Any macros declared in this cycle
are ready to be loaded and executed when applied in libraries in later cycles.

## Executing macros

To apply a macro, a Dart compiler constructs an instance of the applied macro's
class and then invokes methods that implement macro API interfaces. The macro is
a full-featured Dart program with complete access to the entire Dart language.
Macros are Turing-complete.

### Macro arguments

**TODO**: How are metadata annotations that refer to constant objects handled
(#1890)?

Each argument in the metadata annotation for the macro application is converted
to a form that the corresponding constructor on the macro class expects, which
it specifies through parameter types:

*   If the parameter type is `bool`, `double`, `int`, `Null`, `num`, or `String`
    (or the nullable forms of any of those), then the argument expression must
    be a Boolean, number, null, or string literal. Number literals may be
    negated. String literals may not contain any interpolation, but may be
    adjacent strings.

    **TODO**: Do we want to allow more complex expressions? Could we allow
    constant expressions whose identifiers can be successfully resolved before
    macro expansion (#1929)?

*   Else, the argument expression is automatically converted to an object of
    type [Code][] representing the unevaluated expression.

    Note that this implicit lifting of the argument expression only happens when
    the macro constructor is invoked through a macro application. If a macro
    class is directly constructed in Dart (for example, in test code for the
    macro), then the caller is responsible for creating the Code object.

As usual, it is a compile-time error if the type of any argument value (which
may be a Code object) is not a subtype of the corresponding parameter type.

It is a compile-time error if an macro class constructor invoked by a macro
application has a parameter whose type is not Code (or any subtype of it) or
one of the aforementioned primitive types (or a nullable type of any of those).

### Runtime environment

Since macros are executed at compile time directly inside the compiler, they run
in a sandbox that tries to minimize the trouble a poorly (or maliciously)
written macro can cause. A well-behaved macro should not:

*   Reach out to the network or read arbitrary files on the user's machine.
    (Some files can be access by going through the Resource API because the
    user knows those files are permitted.)

*   Consume CPU resources or continue executing code after the macro's work is
    done.

*   Produce different results when run multiple times on the same code. A macro
    should be a [pure function][] from input code to resulting code.

The macro system is *not* designed to provide hard security guarantees of the
above properties. Users should consider the macros that they apply to be trusted
code.

[pure function]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function

The restrictions in the following sections encourage the above properties as
much as possible.

### Core library restrictions

Dart code touches the outside world through core libraries. We prevent macros
from interacting with the outside world in unsafe ways by limiting access to
some `dart:` libraries and some operations inside those libraries. These
libraries are *allowed*:

* `dart:async`
* `dart:collection`
* `dart:convert`
* `dart:core`
* `dart:math`
* `dart:typed_data`

All other `dart:` libraries (`dart:io`, `dart:isolate`, etc.) are completely
prohibited. This ensures that macros cannot directly access the file system or
network, spawn processes, access configuration-specific data that would cause it
to produce different output on the same code, etc.

**TODO**: Define "prohibited" more precisely (#1916).

**TODO**: Specify prohibited APIs inside permitted core libraries (#1915).

### Static mutable state

A user should not be able observe the order in which unrelated macro
applications are executed. This makes it easier for macro authors to write
robust macros and for macro users to reason about their macro uses
independently. That order could become visible if separate macro applications
accessed the same static mutable state&mdash;top-level variables and static
fields.

We are still considering how to address this. Options:

1.  Don't allow macro code to mutate static state at all. This is probably
    overly-restrictive, and may be hard to enforce. There are legitimate use
    cases for this like using `package:logging`.

2.  Run each macro application in a separate isolate. Each application has its
    own independent global mutable state. This is permissive in macros while
    keeping them isolated, but may be slow.

3.  Reset all static state between macro application executions. If this is
    feasible to implement and fast enough, it could work.

4.  Document that mutating static state is a bad practice, but don't block it.
    Give no guarantees around static state persistence between macro
    applications.

    In practice, most macros won't access any static state, so this is harmless.
    But if macros do exploit this (deliberately or inadvertently) then it could
    force implementations to be stuck with a specific execution order in order
    to not break existing code. This is the easiest and fastest solution, but
    the least safe.

**TODO**: Choose a solution (#1917).

### Platform semantics

Macros execute in an environment which may have different semantics than the
environment the program being compiled targets. For instance, Dart numbers have
different semantics on the web than they do when compiled to native code.

The macro execution environment uses the semantics of the compiler or tool's
host environment, whatever those are. (Since most Dart tools are written in Dart
and compiled to native code, that means integers are usually 64 bits.)

**Note**: This is violates the rule that macros should always generate the same
code given the same input code.

This means that code which executes inside a macro may produce a different
result than the same code executed at runtime if the environments are different.
A macro that pre-computes some value and stores the result in the generated code
may need to take care that the computation isn't affected by the host
environment.

Macros do not have visibility into the target environment, and they can only
detect the host environment using existing mechanisms like `0 is double`.

### Environment variables and configuration

Macros do not have access to the system environment variables, since they do not
have access to `dart:io` where they are exposed. Macros also do not have access
to Dart environment variables (`-D` flags). All`fromEnvironment()` constructors
return their default values.

It would be useful for macros to be able to read environment variables so that
they can generate different code in different build configurations. For example,
a macro could generate logging code when applied in debug mode but skip it in a
release build.

However, configuration-specific macros increase the UX complexity of developer
tools and IDEs significantly since the user needs to be able to select which
configuration they want to view their program as. Making macros
configuration-free allows tools to give users a single, consistent version of
generated code.

## Language and API evolution

### Language versioning

Macros generate code directly into existing libraries, and we want to maintain
the behavior that a library only has one language version. Thus, the language
version of macro generated code is always that of the library it is generating
code _into_.

This means that macros need the ability to ask for the language version of a
given library. This will be allowed through the library introspection class,
which is available from the introspection APIs on all declarations via a
`library` getter.

**TODO**: Fully define the library introspection API for each phase.

### API versioning

**TODO**: Finalize the approach here (#1934).

It is possible that future language changes would require a breaking change to
an existing imperative macro API. For instance you could consider what would
happen if we added multiple return values from functions. That would
necessitate a change to many APIs so that they would support multiple return
types instead of a single one.

#### Proposal: Ship macro APIs as a Pub package

Likely, this package would only export directly an existing `dart:` uri, but
it would be able to be versioned like a public package, including tight sdk
constraints (likely on minor version ranges). This would work similar to the
`dart:_internal` library.

This approach would involve more work on our end (to release this package with
each dart release). But it would help keep users on the rails, and give us a
lot of flexibility with the API going forward.

## Resources

Some macros may wish to load resources (such as files). We do want to enable
this, but because macros are untrusted code that runs at analysis time, we
block macros from reading resources outside the scope of the original program.

In order to distinguish whether a resource is "in scope", we use the package
config file. Specifically, we allow access to any resource that exists under
the root URI of any package in the current package config. Note that this may
include resources outside of the `lib` directory of a package - even for
package dependencies - depending on how the package config file is configured.

If the URI points to a symlink it must be followed and the final physical file
location checked to be a valid path under a package root. Otherwise they could
be used to circumvent this check and load a resource that is outside the scope
of the program.

**TODO**: Evaluate whether this restriction is problematic for any current
compilation strategies, such as in bazel, and if so consider alternatives.

Resources are read via a [Uri][]. This may be a `package:` URI, or an absolute
URI of any other form as long as it exists under the root URI of some package
listed in the package config.

[Uri]: https://api.dart.dev/stable/2.13.4/dart-core/Uri-class.html

It is also intuitive for macros to accept a relative URI for resources. In
order to support this macros should compute the absolute URI from the current
libraries URI. This URI is accessible by introspecting on the library of the
declaration that a macro is applied to.

**TODO**: Support for relative URIs in part files (requires a part file
  abstraction)?

**TODO**: Should libraries report their fully resolved URI or the URI that was
used to import them? The latter would mean that files under `lib` could not read
resources outside of `lib`, which has both benefits and drawbacks.

Lastly, since macros must return synchronously, we only expose a synchronous
API for reading resources.

The specific API is as follows, and would only be available at compile time:

```dart
/// A read-only resource API for use in macro implementation code.
class Resource {
  /// Either a `package:` URI, or an absolute URI which is under the root of
  /// one or more packages in the current package config.
  final Uri uri;

  /// Creates a resource reference.
  ///
  /// The [uri] must be valid for this compilation, which means that it exists
  /// under the root URI of one or more packages in the package config file.
  ///
  /// Throws an [InvalidResourceException] if [uri] is not valid.
  Resource(this.uri);

  /// Whether or not a resource actually exists at [uri].
  bool get exists;

  /// Synchronously reads this resource as bytes.
  Uint8List readAsBytesSync();

  /// Synchronously reads this resource as text using [encoding].
  String readAsStringSync({Encoding encoding = utf8});

  /// Synchronously reads the resource as lines of text using [encoding].
  List<String> readAsLinesSync({Encoding encoding = utf8});
}
```

### Resource invalidation

Resources that are read should be treated as source inputs to the program, and
should invalidate the parts of the program that depended on them when they
change.

When a resource is read during compilation, it should either be cached for
subsequent reads to use or a hash of its contents stored. No two macros should
ever see different contents for the same resource, within the same build.

This implies that the compilers will need to be keeping track of which
resources have been read, and adding a dependency on those resources to the
library. The compilers (or tools invoking the compilers) will then need to
watch these resource files for changes in the same way that they watch source
files today.

This also includes tracking when resources are created or destroyed - so for
instance calling any method on a `Resource` should add a dependency on the
`uri` of that resource, whether it exists or not.

#### build_runner

In build_runner we run the compiler in a special directory and we only copy
over the files we know will be read (transitive dart files). How would we
know which resources to copy over, and more specifically which resources were
read by the compiler?

It is likely that we would need some special configuration from the users here
to make this work, at least a general glob of available resources for a package.

#### bazel

No additional complications, resources will need to be provided as data inputs
to the dart_library targets though.

#### frontend_server

The frontend server will need to communicate back the list of resources that
were depended on. This could likely work similarly to how it reports changes
to the Dart sources (probably just treat them in the same way as source files).

## Limitations

- Macros cannot be applied from within the same library cycle as they are
  defined.

- Macros cannot write arbitrary files to disk, and read them in later. They
  can only generate code into the library where they are applied.
  - **TODO**: Full list of available `dart:` APIs.
  - **TODO**: Design a safe API for read-only access to files.
